---
title: Tribonnaci in AOC(2020) Day 10
---

I am participating in Advent Of Code 2020 for the first time this year. While browsing through the [subreddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/adventofcode/) I came across a solution to solve the second part of the [day 10 problem](https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/10) this year. 

This solution was very much faster than my own and involved using Tribonnaci numbers to arrive at a solution. To make things simple I am just going to talk about the part of the question which required the use of Tribonnaci numbers.

## Question
Given a natural number $$N$$, in how many ways can you add the elements in the set $$A = \{1, 2, 3\}$$, such that their sum is $$N$$. The order of selection of numbers matters and repetition is allowed.

## Answer

Firstly, let us take some test cases.

For N = 1, we have just one such combination $$\{[1]\}$$, Total = 1 <br/>
For N = 2, we have $$\{[1,1], [2]\}$$, Total = 2 <br/>
For N = 3, $$\{[1,1,1], [1,2], [2,1], [3]\}$$, Total = 4 <br/>

If we continue futher for $$N = 4,5,6,7...$$, we find that we get the following sequence for the totals
$$
1,2,4,7,13,24...
$$

This series looks quite like the [Tribonacci Series](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/TribonacciNumber.html), and in fact it turns out that it is. But we need to prove that the series is infact Tribonacci series and isn't going to behave differently for some number $$N$$. 

**Here's the proof:**

Consider that we have to solve the above problem for $$N$$. Let $$S_1,\;S_2,\;S_3$$, denote the solution sets when the probelm is solved for $$N-1,\;N-2\;and\;N-3$$ respectively.

<small>**Note:**From here on, $$[k_1,k_2,k_3...]$$ are called as elements of a set and the numbers in them i.e $$k_1,k_2,k_3...$$ are considered as values.</small>

Since, $$N$$ is one greater than $$N-1$$, we can say that, if we add $$1$$ to each element in $$S_1$$, then it becomes a feasible solution for $$N$$.
For e.g if $$[1,1,2]$$ is a part of the solution for $$N=4$$, then $$[1,1,2,1]$$ must be a solution for $$N=5$$. 

Now, if we look at $$S_2$$, we can see that we can add either two 1's or a 2 to each element in the set to get a feasible solution for $$N$$. But adding two 1's will actually lead to redundancies. This is because, if $$[k_1, k_2, k_3 ....k_n]$$ is in $$S2$$, then $$[k_1, k_2, k_3 ....k_n, 1]$$ is in $$S_1$$, which means that we have already considered the case $$[k_1, k_2, k_3 ....k_n, 1, 1]$$. 

This means that we only consider the cases of adding a **single** $$2$$ to the elements in $$S_2$$.

A similar argument can be made for $$S_3$$, and we say that adding a **single** $$3$$ to the elements in $$S_3$$ makes them a feasible solution for $$N$$.

At this point, we cannot go any higher, since adding a $$4$$, is not allowed. Our set $$A$$ is restricted to $$\{1, 2, 3\}$$. Since, we haven't added any more elements to the sets $$S_1,\;S_2,\;S_3$$(we have only modified them), the total number of solutions we have counted till now is same as $$Total(S_1)+Total(S_2)+Total(S_3)$$, where $$Total(x)$$ denotes the total number of elements in set $$x$$.

But, we are not done yet. As we saw in the test cases, $$[1, 2]$$ and $$[2, 1]$$ count as seperate elements, or the order of elements matters. We now have to show that there are no solutions to $$N$$ other than those obtained by modifying $$S_1,\;S_2\;and\;S3$$. 

Let the modified sets be denoted by $$S_{1mod},\;S_{2mod}\;andS_{3mod}$$ and the final solution set for $$N$$ be set $$S$$. We operate such that the added value to each of the elements in $$S_{1mod},\;S_{2mod}\;andS_{3mod}$$ is placed at the last position.
For e.g if we add 2 to $$[1,2,3]$$, then the modified element is $$[1,2,3,2]$$.

We first prove that $$S_{1mod}$$, is the set of all elements in $$S$$ whose last value is 1.

We know that the last value in $$S_{1mod}$$ has to be 1(by design). This means that the sum of the values at other positions has to be $$N-1$$. Since, $$S_1$$ conatins all the solutions for $$N-1$$, and we derived $$S_{1mod}$$ from $$S_1$$, $$S_{1mod}$$ has to contain all elements of $$S$$ where the last value is 1.

By similar arguments we can show that $$S_{2mod}$$ and $$S_{3mod}$$ contain all elements of $$S$$ where the last element is 2 and 3 respectively.

Now, as the last value in any element has to be in $$A$$, i.e it has to be 1 or 2 or 3, and since $$S_{1mod},\;S_{2mod}\;and\;S_{3mod}$$ contain all elements of $$S$$ where the last value is 1,2 or 3 resp, we can say that 
$$
Total(S) = Total(S_1) + Total(S_2) + Total(S_3)
$$

**And thus we get our Tribonacci series**

This result can be extended for other values of set $$A$$, given that set $$A$$ consists of consecutive natural numbers and contains 1. 

## Limitations

The limitation of using the terms of the tribonacci series is that the values in set $$A$$ have to start from 1 and have to be consecutive. The solution using Tribonacci series would not have worked for the AOC challenge if the set $$A$$ did not follow the rule above. My slower but general solution is available at [my solutions repo](https://github.com/tgujar/Advent-Of-Code-2020).

